Title: FrameScope: Temporal Data Valuation for Stream Active Learning in Autonomous Vehicle Systems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.28672v1

Published Time: Tue, 01 Sep 2026 00:06:26 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# FrameScope: Temporal Data Valuation for Stream Active Learning in Autonomous Vehicle Systems 

# Yuheng Zhu 

yzhu63@ncsu.edu Department of Computer Science North Carolina State University Raleigh, NC, USA 

# Man-Ki Yoon 

man-ki.yoon@ncsu.edu Department of Computer Science North Carolina State University Raleigh, NC, USA 

## Abstract 

Autonomous vehicles operate in dynamic, ever-changing en-vironments where new scenarios and edge cases constantly emerge. As a result, static learning models are inadequate for ensuring safe and reliable operation. Continuous learning is essential for adapting to these evolving conditions and maintaining robust performance across diverse real-world settings. However, autonomous vehicles generate massive streams of visual data during operation, and existing con-tinuous learning approaches typically rely on heuristic sam-pling methods that fail to capture temporal dynamics, often overlooking critical learning opportunities or selecting re-dundant frames. In this paper, we introduce FrameScope, a temporal data valuation framework for continuous learning in autonomous vehicles. FrameScope extends neural tangent kernel theory to temporal domains, enabling principled valu-ation of streaming visual data. Unlike cloud-centric methods that transmit all video data for processing, our approach performs principled, local frame selection on the vehicle and queries a cloud-based oracle model only for labels of those high-value frames. Extensive experiments across multiple do-main shifts show that FrameScope consistently outperforms existing methods, achieving higher sample efficiency and significantly reducing catastrophic forgetting in autonomous vehicle perception. By valuing data on the vehicle and query-ing only labels for selected frames, FrameScope reduces bandwidth requirements, enabling scalable operation with a lightweight cloud labeling service. 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 

SEC ’25, Arlington, VA, USA 

© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-2238-7/25/12 https://doi.org/10.1145/3769102.3770611 

## CCS Concepts 

• Theory of computation → Active learning ; • Com-puting methodologies → Lifelong machine learning ; • 

Applied computing → Transportation .

## Keywords 

Continuous Learning, Active Learning, Data Valuation, Au-tonomous Driving, Edge Computing 

ACM Reference Format: 

Yuheng Zhu and Man-Ki Yoon. 2025. FrameScope: Temporal Data Valuation for Stream Active Learning in Autonomous Vehicle Sys-tems. In The Tenth ACM/IEEE Symposium on Edge Computing (SEC ’25), December 3–6, 2025, Arlington, VA, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 15 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3769102.3770611 

## 1 Introduction 

Autonomous vehicles require reliable computer vision sys-tems that can accurately perceive and interpret complex driving environments. A key challenge in deploying these models is ensuring robust generalization to novel driving scenarios and diverse environmental conditions. The fun-damental difficulty stems from the inherent dynamism of real-world environments; autonomous vehicles frequently encounter unexpected situations, such as unfamiliar geo-graphic regions, that may be underrepresented in their initial training data. This creates the critical need for continuous learning [27] capabilities that enable perception models to adapt over time while avoiding catastrophic forgetting of previously learned knowledge. A key bottleneck in continuous learning is the princi-pled data selection from the massive volumes of visual data streaming generated by modern autonomous vehicles. Al-though these vehicles can produce thousands of frames per minute, not all frames contribute equally to model improve-ment; many contain redundant information, whereas others capture critical edge cases invaluable for learning. The chal-lenge is to develop methods that effectively identify valuable frames while maintaining computational efficiency. Existing data selection approaches often rely on heuristic methods, such as random sampling, frame-based temporal arXiv:2608.28672v1 [cs.CV] 24 Aug 2026 SEC ’25, December 3–6, 2025, Arlington, VA, USA Zhu and Yoon Pool-based Active learning 

> (Conventional ML)
> Stream-based Active learning
> (FrameScope)
> Global Optimal
> Full dataset available Global optimal No time constraints Invisible future data Local optimal Instant decision making
> Local Optimal (limited knowledge and time)
> ?Future data Decision time

Figure 1: Traditional pool-based active learning (top), such as DAVINZ [29] versus stream-based active learn-ing (bottom), as in FrameScope. 

sampling, or uncertainty-based selection [13, 25], which fail to capture the temporal dynamics inherent in image streams. As a result, they frequently miss critical learning opportuni-ties or expend resources on redundant data. More advanced theoretical frameworks, such as Shapley values [6] or in-fluence functions [11], require extensive retraining and are computationally prohibitive for edge deployment. Recent advances in data valuation theory offer promis-ing solutions. The DAVINZ framework [29] demonstrated that neural tangent kernel (NTK) theory [9] can estimate data importance for model performance without requiring full model retraining, providing computational advantages over gradient-based [11] and retraining-based [6] methods. However, DAVINZ is a pool-based active learning approach designed for static datasets. As illustrated in Figure 1, pool-based methods assume full access to the dataset a priori 

to enable global optimization of sample selection without time constraints. These methods assess data value based on each instance’s contribution to overall model performance, treating all samples as independent. Accordingly, they have primarily been applied to static image classification datasets such as CIFAR-10 [12] and MNIST [3]. However, continuous learning in autonomous driving operates under an stream-based active learning paradigm, where the assumptions of the pool-based methods break down. In stream-based settings, visual data arrives sequen-tially, and future frames are unavailable at the time of data valuation and selection. This streaming nature fundamen-tally alters the problem formulation: the value of a frame must be assessed in real time, without knowledge of what comes next. This constraint necessitates local optimization under limited information and demands full exploitation of available spatio-temporal cues. To address these challenges, we introduce FrameScope, a framework that leverages data valuation theory in the tem-poral domain to enable effective continuous learning in au-tonomous vehicle vision systems. At its core is the Temporal Neural Tangent Kernel (TNTK) , which offers both theoreti-cal and algorithmic advancements over the classical NTK formulation. TNTK captures temporal dependencies across image frames that are temporally adjacent by incorporat-ing two key innovations: (1) a temporal position weighting scheme which emphasizes contextually rich center frames; and (2) scene dynamics weighting, which adaptively priori-tizes high-dynamics frames that are more likely to capture critical driving maneuvers. We realize this via a temporal data valuation core integrated with a lightweight adaptation loop on the vehicle. We validate our approach through comprehensive experi-ments across multiple domain shift scenarios—geographic, weather, and time—using open-source datasets. The results demonstrate consistent performance improvements over baseline methods across different sampling rates and contin-uous learning phases. In addition to achieving superior final performance, our method offers greater sampling efficiency and effectively mitigates catastrophic forgetting. While ex-isting data valuation methods in autonomous driving rely on heuristic strategies [32], metadata-based selection [28], or computationally intensive influence functions [15], our work pioneers the translation of NTK theory to the valuation of streaming video data. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to introduce NTK-based data valuation within the context of continuous learning for autonomous vehicle vision systems. We also present a complete on-vehicle model adaptation system architecture that integrates data valuation, query se-lection, and continuous learning in a closed-loop manner. It consists of three key components: (i) frame selection via temporal data valuation, (ii) cloud-based oracle model for high-quality label generation, and (iii) on-vehicle GPU-based model retraining. By transmitting only selected high-value frames to the cloud, the system ensures bandwidth and com-putational efficiency suitable for edge deployment, while preserving continuous adaptation capabilities. The implications of this work extend beyond autonomous driving to any domain that requires continuous learning from streaming visual data, including surveillance systems, robotics, and online video analysis. By providing a theo-retically grounded, yet computationally efficient approach to temporal data valuation, our method addresses a funda-mental challenge in deploying machine learning systems in dynamic, real-world environments. 

## 2 Related Work 2.1 Data Valuation 

Traditional data valuation methods. Data valuation quan-tifies individual data points’ contribution to model perfor-mance, crucial for fair resource allocation. Early approaches FrameScope SEC ’25, December 3–6, 2025, Arlington, VA, USA 

rooted in cooperative game theory utilize the Shapley value [24] for fair utility distribution among contributing players. Ghorbani and Zou [6] formalized Data Shapley for super-vised learning, where data points serve as players and model performance as a utility function, satisfying efficiency, sym-metry, and additivity properties. However, exact Shapley value calculation requires exponential complexity across all possible data subsets. Jia et al. [10] developed approxima-tion algorithms including Truncated Monte Carlo and Group Testing, making Shapley-based data valuation practical for real-world applications. 

Deep learning-based data valuation. Traditional meth-ods requiring extensive retraining became computationally prohibitive for large-scale deep learning. Wu et al. [29] intro-duced DAVINZ, a training-free approach leveraging Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) theory and Maximum Mean Discrep-ancy (MMD) to estimate data value without model conver-gence. By exploiting neural network properties at initial-ization and deriving domain-aware generalization bounds, DAVINZ reduces computation from hours to minutes while maintaining correlation with ground truth valuations and theoretical properties of Shapley-based methods. 

## 2.2 Active Learning and Sample Selection 

Traditional active learning approaches. Active learn-ing reduces annotation costs by strategically selecting infor-mative unlabeled examples [2, 21]. Main strategies include uncertainty sampling (selecting the highest prediction uncer-tainty examples) [14, 30], query-by-committee (employing multiple models to identify prediction disagreement) [23], and expected model change (selecting examples causing the greatest parameter changes) [19, 22]. 

Deep learning-based active learning. Modern neural net-works introduce computational efficiency and representa-tion learning challenges [1]. Advances focus on Bayesian approaches like Monte Carlo Dropout [4] and BALD [7] for uncertainty estimation, and diversity-based methods like Core-Set [20] and BADGE [1] combine uncertainty with representativeness to avoid redundant selection. 

Streaming and continuous active learning. Stream-based active learning must contend with challenges such as con-cept drift, limited storage, and real-time constraints. Contin-uous active learning extends this paradigm to handle evolv-ing data distributions and tasks [18], requiring a balance between exploring new concepts and exploiting existing knowledge. AdaptAV [32] proposed a cloud-based continu-ous learning framework for autonomous vehicles that lever-ages cloud-hosted oracle models for ground truth generation and model retraining. While demonstrating the feasibility of cloud-assisted learning, AdaptAV relies on heuristic frame sampling strategies, such as periodic, density-based, and event-based methods, without employing principled data valuation. This approach may miss critical learning opportu-nities or expend resources on suboptimal samples. Hawk [5] integrates semi-supervised, active, and trans-fer learning into a live learning pipeline that performs bandwidth-aware, selective transmission to remote labelers under tight constrained backhaul. It is primarily optimized for efficient rare-positive acquisition through bandwidth-adaptive ranking and serves as a strong, well-engineered baseline for edge-based continuous improvement. Similar to Hawk, but unlike cloud-centric approaches that transmit all frames to the cloud for sampling and retraining, FrameScope selects high-value frames directly on-vehicle and requests labels only for those. The key distinction lies in the 

selection criterion : FrameScope performs temporally-aware, distribution-shift-robust data valuation, whereas Hawk emphasizes rare-positive recovery via bandwidth-adaptive ranking. Accordingly, FrameScope aims for continual calibration under evolving conditions, complementing Hawk’s focus on efficient rare-event collection under extreme scarcity. 

## 3 FrameScope System Architecture 

Deciding where to execute the continuous learning loop in-troduces system-level constraints. A cloud-only retraining architecture would repeatedly push large model weights to the fleet—straining downlink budgets (e.g., SSD-MobileNet 

≈ 30 MB; Faster R-CNN ≈ 160 MB) and require the cloud ser-vice to track per-vehicle model state (versions, checkpoints, routing), while centralizing updates for many vehicles cre-ates scaling and queueing pressure. These considerations motivate performing data valuation and retraining on the vehicle. However, processing 100% of streaming video data for on-vehicle model retraining imposes prohibitive compu-tational and bandwidth demands, making selective sampling essential for viable active learning in autonomous vehicles. These challenges are compounded by mobile network condi-tions, where fluctuating bandwidth and transmission delays make continuous data upload impractical. At the same time, on-vehicle edge computing resources are far more limited than those in the cloud; processing or temporarily storing large volumes of video data can quickly exhaust available ca-pacity. These constraints necessitate intelligent, lightweight sampling decisions, as opposed to the complex optimization procedures feasible only in pool-based active learning. Fur-thermore, the dynamic nature of driving environments leads to temporal decay in data value, as the usefulness of train-ing samples diminishes over time with changing conditions, routes, and scenarios. FrameScope enables on-vehicle model adaptation that continuously improves autonomous driving perception SEC ’25, December 3–6, 2025, Arlington, VA, USA Zhu and Yoon Retrain Device Model 

> On-Vehicle Model
> Oracle Model
> Camera Stream
> Selected Frames Labels
> 𝑥 𝑦
> On-Vehicle Model Adaption
> Data Valuation
> GPU
> Query Selection
> Model Update Query

Figure 2: FrameScope system architecture. 

through selective data valuation and query-based learning. It introduces principled data valuation with theoretically grounded frame selection and executes the end-to-end loop on the vehicle while using the cloud only as a labeling oracle for queried frames. This design enables edge deployment under constrained bandwidth and computes budgets without centralizing sampling or retraining. The overall architecture, illustrated in Figure 2, comprises three main components operating in a closed-loop manner: 

Camera Stream : The system continuously receives real-time video streams from vehicle-mounted cameras, which capture dynamic driving scenarios. 

On-Vehicle Model Adaptation : It orchestrates the frame valuation and selection and model updating process through three interconnected modules: 

• Data Valuation Module : Employs our proposed FrameScope score to evaluate the learning value of incoming camera frames, considering both visual complexity and temporal dependencies. 

• Query Selection Module : Acts as a filter that selects the most valuable frames for annotation based on the computed data valuation scores and available labeling budget constraints. 

• Model Retraining Module : Utilizes on-vehicle GPU re-sources to update the perception model using newly labeled high-value frames. 

Oracle Model : The system leverages cloud-based oracle models with superior accuracy and computational resources to provide high-quality ground-truth labels for the queried frames, which enables knowledge transfer to the resource-constrained on-vehicle model. Model retraining runs opportunistically (e.g., during idle windows) and is warm-started from the current model. The loop targets condition-level drift, such as illumination and weather, and a small replay buffer helps preserve prior com-petencies. This update policy reduces model weight transfers and keeps the cloud stateless. 

## 4 Stream Data Valuation using Temporal Neural Tangent Kernel 

In this section, we present our temporal data valuation method designed for stream-based active learning in autonomous driving scenarios. 

## 4.1 Problem Statement and Contribution 

Originally designed for static datasets, DAVINZ faces the following challenges when applied directly to video streams: 

• Temporal blindness : It fails to capture inter-frame de-pendencies critical for understanding motion and con-text in video. 

• Granularity mismatch : Dataset-level valuation is not directly applicable to frame-level valuation required in streaming scenarios. 

• Dynamic scene complexity : Static assumptions cannot handle motion and scene dynamics. To address the above challenges, we propose the following innovations: 

• Temporal Neural Tangent Kernel (TNTK) : extends NTK theory to temporal domains. 

• Frame-level MMD (FL-MMD) computation : refines do-main variance analysis to single-frame granularity. 

• Multi-scale timing modeling : adapts to the dynamics of different time scales. 

## 4.2 Problem Definition 

Given a continuously arriving video stream S =

{x1, x2, ..., x𝑖 , ... }, where each frame x𝑖 represents amulti-dimensional visual data, the goal is to learn a selection function (i.e., whether to include a frame in the retraining set) 𝜙 : F → [ 0, 1] that maximizes the model performance improvement under a labeled budget constraint 𝐵 :

𝜙 ∗ = arg max  

> 𝜙

E

"∑︁ 

> x∈ S

𝜙 (x) · ΔL( x)

#

s.t. ∑︁ 

> x∈ S

𝜙 (x) ≤ 𝐵, 

(1) where ΔL( x) denotes the marginal contribution of frame x

to the model performance, and 𝐵 is the labeling budget. The model performance can be quantified by, for example, object detection accuracy, semantic segmentation IoU (Intersection over Union), classification error rates, etc. The labeling bud-get represents the maximum number of frames that can be sent to the cloud oracle for labeling, given the computational and bandwidth constraints. Our goal is to select the most valuable frames for retrain-ing under budget constraints, without observing the entire dataset. This is a fundamental constraint in real-world au-tonomous driving scenarios, where future visual data is un-available. To address this, we introduce a data valuation FrameScope SEC ’25, December 3–6, 2025, Arlington, VA, USA Highway Rainy Night City Street Overcast Daytime       

> City Street Snowy Night Highway Overcast Daytime
> Highway Cloudy Daytime Residential Overcast Dawn/Dusk
> City Street Overcast Daytime City Street Cloudy Daytime
> High FrameScope Value Low FrameScope Value
> -4.0769 -4.2283 -4.4869 -4.6782 -372.1419 -439.6530 -439.7622 -460.9743

Figure 3: Example of high FrameScope value (top) and low FrameScope value (bottom) frames. 

metric called the FrameScope score . It is designed to capture both temporal dependencies among frames and scene dy-namics. Figure 3 illustrates examples of high- and low-value frames, where high-value frames are expected to contribute more significantly to model performance improvement. The score estimates training benefit in temporal context. Domain labels do not directly determine the score; novelty relative to prior observations and representativeness within the local window are primary factors. In the remainder of this section, we describe how to compute the FrameScope score for each frame in a continuous video stream and how it is used to select high-value frames for continuous learning. 

## 4.3 Preliminary: DAVINZ Framework 

The DAVINZ framework evaluates the learning value of data, specifically quantifying how much a given dataset S can contribute to model performance improvement through two core components: 

𝜈 (S) = −𝜅 √︄ ˆ𝑦 𝑇 Θ−10 ˆ𝑦 𝑚 S

− 𝑑 H (T , S) , (2) where ˆ 𝑦 represents the model predictions on dataset S, Θ0

is the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) matrix at initialization, 

𝑚 S denotes the size of dataset S, 𝜅 is a scaling parameter, and 𝑑 H (T , S) measures the Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) between candidate domain distribution T and source dataset distribution S in reproducing kernel Hilbert space 

H . The first component captures the generalization bound (i.e., how good the data contributes to training) based on the neural tangent kernel theory, while the second component quantifies the domain distribution alignment. 𝜈 (𝑆 ) is always negative, and the closer it is to zero, the higher the value of the given dataset 𝑆 is. To understand how DAVINZ quantifies the learning value through the first component, we briefly review the Neu-ral Tangent Kernel theory that underlies its generalization bound. Neural Tangent Kernel theory provides a theoretical framework for understanding the training dynamics of deep neural networks by characterizing how the network function changes during gradient descent training. The theory reveals that the training dynamics of an infinitely wide neural net-work can be inscribed by fixing the kernel function: 

Θ(x, x′) = ∇𝜃 𝑓 (x, 𝜃 0)𝑇 ∇𝜃 𝑓 (x′, 𝜃 0), (3) where 𝑓 (x, 𝜃 ) represents the neural network function with parameters 𝜃 , and ∇𝜃 𝑓 (x, 𝜃 0) is the gradient of the network output with respect to the parameters at initialization. That is, it characterizes the sensitivity of the network’s output to changes in the model parameters for a given input x.Accordingly, Eq. (3) quantifies the similarity between the effects of two different inputs, x and x′, on the network during gradient descent training. DAVINZ constructs its domain-aware generalization bound based on the NTK theory. However, in continuous video streams, temporal dependencies between frames carry critical semantic information that classical NTK theory does not capture. For instance, in autonomous driving scenarios, the value of a sharp turn is determined not only by the current frame but also by the broader motion trajectory formed by preceding and subsequent frames. Traditional NTK treats each frame as an independent sample and thus overlooks the temporal structure essential for understanding such dynamic events. 

## 4.4 Temporal Extension of DAVINZ Components 

To address the limitations of directly applying DAVINZ to video streams, we propose temporal extensions to both com-ponents of the DAVINZ scoring function in Eq. (2): (1) Temporal Neural Tangent Kernel (TNTK) : We extend the first component −𝜅 √︃ ˆ𝑦 𝑇 Θ−10 ˆ𝑦 𝑚 S (in-domain complexity) to incorporate temporal dependencies through sliding window analysis and frame-level weighting. (2) Frame-Level Maximum Mean Discrepancy (FL-MMD) :We refine the second component, 𝑑 H (T , S) , by transi-tioning from dataset-level to frame-level domain dis-crepancy computation. With the above temporal extensions, we can define the FrameScope score for each frame in a continuous video stream: 

Definition 1 (FrameScope Score). For a frame x𝑖 in a continuous video stream, its FrameScope score is defined as follows: 

𝜈 (x𝑖 ) = −TNTK (x𝑖 ) − 𝑑 H (T , x𝑖 ), (4) 

where TNTK (x𝑖 ) is the Temporal Neural Tangent Kernel score that captures the temporal-aware in-domain complexity, and 

𝑑 H (T , x𝑖 ) represents the frame-level domain discrepancy. Algorithm 1 summarizes the computation steps for the SEC ’25, December 3–6, 2025, Arlington, VA, USA Zhu and Yoon Frames 

𝐱 !"# 𝐱 !"$ 𝐱 !%& 𝐱 !%' 𝐱 !%! 𝐱 !%( 𝐱 !%) 𝐱 !%* 𝐱 !%" 𝐱 !%% 

𝐖 !"$ 

> Sliding Window

𝐖 !%& 

𝐖 !%' 

𝐖 !%! 

𝐖 !%( 

> TNTK 𝐱 !"# , 𝐖 !$%
> TNTK 𝐱 !"# , 𝐖 !"&
> TNTK 𝐱 !"# , 𝐖 !"'
> TNTK 𝐱 !"# , 𝐖 !"!
> TNTK 𝐱 !"# , 𝐖 !"#

TNTK 𝐱 !"# = ∑ TNTK(𝐱 !"# , 𝐖 $)!"# $%!&' 

∑ 𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑠 !"# $%!&' 

Figure 4: FrameScope’s frame-wise TNTK calculation using window-wise NTK scores. A frame’s TNTK value is assessed based on its temporal position within multiple overlapping sliding windows. Algorithm 1 FrameScope Score for Frame x𝑖 , 𝜈 (x𝑖 )

Require: Video stream S, frame x𝑖 , target domain T , win-dow size 𝑤 , decay parameter 𝜆 , threshold 𝜃  

> 1:

Step 1: Compute TNTK score  

> 2:

𝑡𝑛𝑡𝑘 _𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 = TNTK (x𝑖 ) ⊲ Section 4.5  

> 3:

Step 2: Compute frame-level MMD score ⊲ Section 4.6  

> 4:

Extract features: feat 𝑖 = 𝑓 (x𝑖 ) using current on-vehicle model  

> 5:

Extract target features: {feat 𝑡 𝑘 }| T |  

> 𝑘 =1

= {𝑓 (t𝑘 )} | T |  

> 𝑘 =1
> 6:

𝑓 𝑙 _𝑚𝑚𝑑 _𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 = FL-MMD (feat 𝑖 , {feat 𝑡 𝑘 }| T | 

> 𝑘 =1

) 

> 7:

Step 3: Combine both components  

> 8:

𝜈 (x𝑖 ) = −𝑡𝑛𝑡𝑘 _𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 − 𝑓 𝑙 _𝑚𝑚𝑑 _𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 ⊲ Eq. (4)  

> 9:

return 𝜈 (x𝑖 )

FrameScope score. The detailed steps for computing the TNTK and FL-MMD are provided in Sections 4.5 and 4.6, respectively. 

## 4.5 Temporal Neural Tangent Kernel 

High-Level Idea: To address the set-based valuation lim-itations of the standard NTK theory, we introduce a novel Temporal Neural Tangent Kernel (TNTK) method that en-ables frame-wise valuation in continuous video streams. The key idea is to compute the NTK values over overlapping slid-ing windows of frames. This allows us to capture temporal dependencies while still enabling frame-level valuation. Figure 4 illustrates the high-level idea of our TNTK method. In this figure, we show a continuous video stream with frames x268 , x269 , . . . , x277 , and multiple sliding windows 

{W𝑗 } of size 𝑤 = 5 that overlap with each other. As we can see, each frame x𝑖 appears in multiple overlapping windows with different temporal positions: for instance, frame x273 appears in windows W269 , . . . , W273 . Within each window, all frames share a single NTK value (as the standard NTK theory does support set-level valuation only), which represents the collective learning value of that temporal window as a whole. However, our key insight is that different frames within a window contribute differently to this collective value based on their temporal positions. For example, the center frame x273 in window W271 has richer bi-directional temporal context than boundary frames like x271 or x275 . But, in the other windows, the frame x273 

may not be the most informative frame. Thus, our valuation method operates under the key assumption that center frames in a sliding window can best represent the window’s temporal context. To achieve frame-level valuation using window-level NTK values, we employ a weighted aggregation strategy. Each frame receives two weights: Temporal Position Weight , which FrameScope SEC ’25, December 3–6, 2025, Arlington, VA, USA Sliding Window 

𝐖 !

Standard NTK (shared) Temporal Position Weight Scene Dynamics Weight 

𝐱 !"# 𝐱 ! 𝐱 !$# 𝒙 !$% 

𝜆 |#$%&#| 

𝜆 |#$'&#| 𝜆 |#&#| = 1 𝜆 |#&'&#| 

𝜆 |#&%&#| 

𝜔 ((𝐱 #&% ) 𝜔 ((𝐱 #&' ) 𝜔 ((𝐱 #) 𝜔 ((𝐱 #$% )𝜔 ((𝐱 #$' )× × × × ×

𝐱 !"% 

𝑡𝑟 Θ)&' 𝐖 !

×𝑡𝑟 Θ)&' 𝐖 !

×𝑡𝑟 Θ)&' 𝐖 !

×𝑡𝑟 Θ)&' 𝐖 !

×𝑡𝑟 Θ)&' 𝐖 !

×𝜔 *(𝐱 #&% , 𝐖 !) 𝜔 *(𝐱 #&' , 𝐖 !) 𝜔 *(𝐱 #, 𝐖 !) 𝜔 *(𝐱 #$' , 𝐖 !) 𝜔 *(𝐱 #$% , 𝐖 !)    

> TNTK 𝐱 !"# , 𝐖 $TNTK 𝐱 !"% , 𝐖 $TNTK 𝐱 !, 𝐖 $TNTK 𝐱 !&% , 𝐖 $TNTK 𝐱 !&# , 𝐖 $
> =====

Per-Window TNTK Score 

Figure 5: The per-window TNTK calculation for frames in a sliding window. 

is based on its relative position within each sliding window, with center frames receiving higher weights, and Scene Dy-namics Weight , which reflects the amount of visual dynamics between consecutive frames. The final score for a frame is then computed as a weighted average of its contributions across all sliding windows that contain it, where the weights are determined by both the temporal position and scene dy-namics. See Figure 4 again for the illustration. For frame x273 ,its per-window TNTK value is computed as TNTK (x273 , W𝑗 )

for each sliding window W𝑗 that contains it. The final TNTK score for x273 is then computed as the weighted average of these per-window scores. This design enables each frame to be evaluated from multiple temporal perspectives while addressing the computational constraints of NTK theory. 

Detailed Steps: We first define the per-window TNTK score for frame x𝑖 within a single sliding window W𝑗 (which is illustrated in Figure 5): TNTK (x𝑖 , W𝑗 ) = 𝑡𝑟 (Θ−10 (W𝑗 )) · 𝜔 𝑝 (x𝑖 , W𝑗 ) · 𝜔 𝑠 (x𝑖 ), (5) where 𝑡𝑟 (Θ−10 (W𝑗 )) is the trace of the inverse NTK matrix computed over all frames within window W𝑗 , capturing the collective learning complexity of the window based on the neural tangent kernel theory. It essentially quantifies the amount of gradient information that the temporal window can contribute to model training. The Temporal Position Weight 𝜔 𝑝 (x𝑖 , W𝑗 ) reflects the relative importance of frame 

x𝑖 within window W𝑗 , assigning higher weights to frames near the center of the window due to their richer bidirec-tional temporal context. In parallel, the Scene Dynamics Weight 𝜔 𝑠 (x𝑖 ) captures the importance of frame x𝑖 based on the magnitude of visual changes between consecutive frames, prioritizing dynamic scenes over static ones. Together, these two weighting mechanisms ensure that the most temporally 

Algorithm 2 TNTK Score for Frame x𝑖 , TNTK (x𝑖 )

Require: Frame x𝑖 , sliding windows containing x𝑖 : {W𝑗 |

x𝑖 ∈ W𝑗 }, window size 𝑤 , decay parameter 𝜆 , scene dynamics threshold 𝜃  

> 1:

Initialize 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 _𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 = 0, 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 _𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡 = 0 

> 2:

for each sliding window W𝑗 containing x𝑖 do  

> 3:

𝚯 0 (W𝑗 ) = [∇ 𝜽 𝑓 (x𝑘 , 𝜽 0)𝑇 ∇𝜽 𝑓 (x𝑙 , 𝜽 0)] 𝑘,𝑙  

> 4:

𝑘𝑒𝑟𝑛𝑒𝑙 _𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑒 = 𝑡𝑟 (𝚯 −10 (W𝑗 )) ⊲ Trace approximation of ˆ 𝑦 𝑇 Θ−10 ˆ𝑦 /𝑚 𝑆  

> 5:

x𝑐 : center frame of window W𝑗  

> 6:

𝜔 𝑝 = 𝜆 |𝑖 −𝑐 | ⊲ Temporal position weight  

> 7:

𝜔 𝑠 = Algorithm 3 (x𝑖 ) ⊲ Scene dynamics weight  

> 8:

TNTK (x𝑖 , W𝑗 ) = 𝑘𝑒𝑟𝑛𝑒𝑙 _𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑒 × 𝜔 𝑝 × 𝜔 𝑠  

> 9:

𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 _𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 + = TNTK (x𝑖 , W𝑗 ) 

> 10:

𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 _𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡 + = 𝜔 𝑝 × 𝜔 𝑠  

> 11:

end for  

> 12:

TNTK (x𝑖 ) = 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 _𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 /𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 _𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡 ⊲ Normalization  

> 13:

return TNTK (x𝑖 )

and contextually informative frames receive appropriate em-phasis in the final TNTK computation. We formally define both weights shortly below. Once we compute the per-window TNTK score for frame 

x𝑖 across all sliding windows W𝑗 that contain it, we can aggregate these scores to obtain the final TNTK score for frame x𝑖 . Specifically, we compute the weighted average of the per-window TNTK scores: TNTK (x𝑖 ) =

Í𝑗 TNTK (x𝑖 , W𝑗 )

Í𝑗 𝜔 𝑝 (x𝑖 , W𝑗 ) · 𝜔 𝑠 (x𝑖 ) . (6) Algorithm 2 summarizes the TNTK scoring operation. SEC ’25, December 3–6, 2025, Arlington, VA, USA Zhu and Yoon 

Temporal position weight: It quantifies the influence of frame position within a temporal sliding window using an exponential decay function: 

𝜔 𝑝 (x𝑖 , W𝑗 ) = 𝜆 |𝑖 −𝑐 |, (7) where 𝑐 is the index of the window W𝑗 ’s center frame x𝑐 , and 

𝜆 is the decay parameter. The design of temporal position weight employs an exponential decay mechanism that natu-rally emphasizes central frames while progressively reducing the influence of temporally distant frames. This function ex-hibits the following key characteristics: 

• Center maximization : When 𝑖 = 𝑐 , 𝜔 𝑝 (x𝑐 , W𝑗 ) = 𝜆 0 =

1, ensuring maximum weight for the center frame. 

• Distance monotonicity : Weights decrease monotoni-cally with distance from the center, with faster decay for smaller decay parameter 𝜆 , preserving temporal locality. 

• Position sensitivity : Each frame receives different weights across different sliding windows depending on its relative position within each window. 

• Computational efficiency : The simple exponential form enables efficient computation on edge devices. 

Scene dynamics weight: In our TNTK model, frames with higher scene dynamics are weighted more heavily based on the following intuitions: 

• Rare event capture : High scene dynamics often indicate unusual or challenging scenarios such as emergency braking, sharp turns, or obstacle avoidance that are underrepresented in training data but critical for safety, making them more valuable for learning. 

• Temporal complexity : Dynamic scenes contain richer temporal dependencies and spatial transformations and thus provide more diverse training targets com-pared to static scenes. 

• Redundancy reduction : Static or low-motion scenes of-ten exhibit temporal redundancy where consecutive frames contain nearly identical content, hence they lead to diminishing returns in model training. Includ-ing such redundant frames may also slow down train-ing convergence and waste computational resources without providing new learning signals, whereas high-dynamics frames offer more diverse and informative training samples. 

Definition 2 (Scene Dynamics). Given consecutive frames x𝑖 and x𝑖 +1 with their latent feature representations 

𝑓 (x𝑖 ) and 𝑓 (x𝑖 +1) extracted through the current on-vehicle 

Algorithm 3 Scene Dynamics Weight 𝜔 𝑠 (x𝑖 )

Require: Frame index 𝑖 , scene dynamics threshold 𝜃 , fea-ture extractor 𝑓 (·)  

> 1:

Extract features: feat 𝑖 = 𝑓 (x𝑖 ), feat 𝑖 +1 = 𝑓 (x𝑖 +1) 

> 2:

Compute cosine similarity: cos_sim = feat 𝑖 ·feat 𝑖 +1   

> | | feat 𝑖 | | · | | feat 𝑖 +1| |
> 3:

𝑀 𝑖 = 1 − cos_sim ⊲ Scene dynamics  

> 4:

if 𝑀 𝑖 > 𝜃 then  

> 5:

𝜔 𝑠 = 1 + 𝑀 𝑖  

> 𝜃

⊲ Higher weight due to dynamic scene  

> 6:

else  

> 7:

𝜔 𝑠 = 1 ⊲ Baseline weight  

> 8:

end if  

> 9:

return 𝜔 𝑠 

model, 1 the scene dynamics is defined as: 

𝑀 (x𝑖 ) = 1 − cos _sim  𝑓 (x𝑖 ), 𝑓 (x𝑖 +1), (8) 

where cos _sim (u, v) = u·v 

> | | u| | | | v| |

denotes the cosine similarity function of two vectors u and v.

We use cosine similarity because it can capture directional changes in the latent feature space, which reflects semantic or structural differences rather than mere pixel-level varia-tions. By comparing the angle between normalized feature vectors, it highlights meaningful content changes while be-ing robust to variations in feature magnitudes caused by factors like lighting or scale. This makes it a reliable metric for detecting scene dynamics, as large angular differences typically correspond to significant visual changes. As a re-sult, Eq. (8) serves as a practical and interpretable proxy for scene dynamics. 

Definition 3 (Scene Dynamics Weight). Based on the scene dynamics, the Scene Dynamics Weight is defined as an adaptive weight function: 

𝜔 𝑠 (x𝑖 ) =

(

1 + 𝑀 (x𝑖 ) 

> 𝜃

if 𝑀 (x𝑖 ) > 𝜃, 

1 otherwise, (9) 

where 𝜃 (e.g., 0.1) is the scene dynamics threshold parameter used to filter low-intensity noise movements. 

Eq. (8) quantifies inter-frame dissimilarity, while Eq. (9) provides an adaptive mechanism to capture dynamic varia-tions in information value. Traditional temporal modeling often assumes that all frames possess identical information density. However, in dynamic visual scenarios such as au-tonomous driving, different frames exhibit varying degrees of variation in information value. The Scene Dynamics Weight        

> 1In our implementation based on SSD_MobileNet, we extract features from the base_net component of the model, which comprises the MobileNet feature extraction layers. The features are obtained by applying global average pooling over the spatial dimensions to produce a 1024-dimensional feature vector for each input frame. FrameScope SEC ’25, December 3–6, 2025, Arlington, VA, USA Frame order
> Stops at red light Accelerates Right turn Stops in traffic Being overtaken

Figure 6: An example illustrating how the Scene Dynamics Weight varies across different driving scenarios within a single driving sequence. 

is specifically designed to address this challenge based on our core hypothesis that inter-frame scene dynamics is positively correlated with the potential learning value for model train-ing. This assumption is grounded in the maximum entropy principle from information theory; high-dynamics regions typically correspond to higher information entropy, thus possessing greater learning value. The adaptive weight function in Eq. (9) is designed to balance multiple considerations: it preserves a baseline by assigning a minimum weight of 1 to all frames, which pre-vents excessive downweighting of low-dynamics frames that may still contain valuable information, such as challenging object appearances or subtle weather conditions. Simultane-ously, the function amplifies high-dynamics frames—those exceeding the threshold—by assigning additional weight, re-flecting their potentially greater learning value. Its linear scaling property ensures that weights grow proportionally with scene dynamics, effectively capturing the continuous na-ture of scene adaptation. Finally, the threshold-based design provides upper-bound control and thus prevents excessive weight inflation that could destabilize the learning process. 

Example: Figure 6 illustrates how the Scene Dynamics Weight varies across different driving scenarios within a 200-frame sequence. The graphs on the left display three synchronized curves: cosine similarity (top), scene dynamics (middle), and the resulting Scene Dynamics Weight (bottom). The Scene Dynamics Weight curve reflects the threshold-based filtering mechanism: weights remain at the baseline value of 1.0 when scene dynamics fall below the threshold 𝜃 

(which we set to 0.1), effectively filtering out low-dynamics scenes while amplifying significant dynamic events. By ad-justing 𝜃 , users can control the sensitivity of the system. The image samples on the right highlight five driving scenarios that demonstrate the expected behavior of our metric: (1) When the ego vehicle stops at a red light, consecu-tive frames exhibit high cosine similarity, leading to low Scene Dynamics Weight, which indicates minimal learning value. (2) As the ego vehicle accelerates after passing an intersec-tion, cosine similarity decreases and Scene Dynamics Weight increases accordingly. (3) Significant visual changes during a right turn result in higher scene dynamics and elevated Scene Dynamics Weight, capturing the increased learning potential of such maneuvers. (4) The metrics return to values similar to those in sce-nario (1) as the ego vehicle stops for traffic, again indi-cating a static scene. (5) Most notably, when a white minivan quickly passes the stationary ego vehicle from the side, cosine similarity drops sharply and the Scene Dynamics Weight peaks. This rare and dynamic event is correctly identified as highly valuable for training. This example demonstrates that the Scene Dynamics Weight mechanism assigns appropriately higher weights to dynamic events than to static scenes, aligning with their relative learn-ing value. 

## 4.6 Frame-level Domain Discrepancy 

While TNTK addresses the temporal extension of the in-domain complexity term, we also need to adapt the second component of DAVINZ, i.e., the domain discrepancy term 𝑑 H (T , S) , for frame-level evaluation. In the original DAVINZ framework, MMD is computed between entire SEC ’25, December 3–6, 2025, Arlington, VA, USA Zhu and Yoon 

Table 1: Number of video records for different domains.                           

> Domain Geographic Weather Time
> highway residential city street other clear cloudy rainy snowy foggy daytime dawn/dusk night
> Record# 52 19 106 395 34 16 16 19 96 19 65

datasets. However, for stream-based active learning, we require frame-level domain discrepancy scores. For a frame x𝑖 in a continuous video stream, its frame-level domain discrepancy, FL-MMD, is defined as follows: 

𝑑 H (T , x𝑖 ) = MMD (𝑓 (x𝑖 ), {𝑓 (t𝑘 )} | T | 

> 𝑘 =1

), (10) where 𝑓 (x𝑖 ) denotes the feature representation of frame x𝑖 

extracted using the current on-vehicle model, and {𝑓 (t𝑘 )} | T | 

> 𝑘 =1

represent the feature embeddings of target domain samples. This frame-level MMD quantifies how dissimilar an individ-ual frame is from the target domain distribution, enabling fine-grained assessment of domain alignment. 

## 5 Evaluation 5.1 Experiment Setup 

We use a workstation equipped with an Intel i9-13900F CPU and an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 GPU. Although the GPU has 24 GB of video memory by default, we manually limit its maximum VRAM usage to 4 GB to simulate the constrained computing resources typical of edge platforms. 

## 5.2 Datasets 

• Waymo Open Dataset [26]: It serves as the source do-main in our domain shifting experiments; that is, the on-vehicle model is initially trained on this dataset. For the initial weight training, we choose the first 180 video records (each has about 200 frames) from the validation set in Waymo Open Dataset v1.4.2. It is cap-tured at 10 Hz with 1920x1280 resolution. 

• BDD100K [31]: It serves as the target domain in our domain shifting experiments; that is, the on-vehicle model has never seen this dataset before. But, it is used for continuous learning after the initial model (trained on the Waymo Dataset) is deployed on the vehicle. We use the MOT-2020 object detection set that consists of 200 dashcam video sequences, each of which has about 200 frames, resulting in a total of 39,973 frames. It is captured at 5 Hz in 1280x720 resolution. 

## 5.3 Models 

• SSD_MobileNet [8, 16]: It is the on-vehicle model that is subject to continuous learning. It is an object detection model that combines Single Shot Multibox Detector with a MobileNet architecture, making it fast and ef-ficient for real-time applications on edge devices. It contains 3,206,976 parameters, and the weight file size is 27,636 KB. It is important to note that we choose this model not only because it enables real-time object detection in vehicles, but also because of the correla-tion between the model parameters and the size of the training set in continuous learning. 

• Faster R-CNN [17]: It serves as an Oracle model provid-ing labeling information upon each query sent from the vehicle. Faster R-CNN is a high-performance object detection model. It is utilized with a region proposal network to proposes candidate regions, and a second stage classifies them and refines the bounding boxes. The model contains 41,092,136 parameters, more than 12 times the number of parameters in SSD_MobileNet. 

## 5.4 Results 

In this section, we answer the following questions: 

• How does our FrameScope sampling perform com-pared to baseline approaches under different domain-shifting scenarios? 

• What is the impact of sampling rate on model perfor-mance and resource efficiency? 

• What are the computational and bandwidth advan-tages of our edge-based sampling approach compared to the cloud-centric approach? 

Domain shifting. The metadata that accompanies the BDD100K dataset, such as geographic location, weather condition, and temporal context (time of day), provides valuable information about the driving environment, which we leverage to create domain-shifting scenarios. The driving environment is split into three main domains: geographic, weather, and time. The distribution of each condition for three domains is shown in Table 1. Out of 200 video records in the BDD100K dataset, we use 180 records for the continuous learning. These are the video sequences that an autonomous vehicle would observe dur-ing actual road driving, from which our sampling methods will select frames for model retraining. We arrange these 180 records with different environmental conditions in order, roughly from easy to hard. For example, as shown in Figure 7, the geographic domain follows an ordering that begins with highways, followed by residential areas and then city streets, FrameScope SEC ’25, December 3–6, 2025, Arlington, VA, USA Highways Residential City Streets Gas Station Parking Lot Random Density-based Event-based FrameScope 

Figure 7: Continuous learning performance across geographic domain transitions. The system encounters sequen-tial domain shifts from highways to residential areas, city streets, gas stations, and parking lots. Our FrameScope approach (green) consistently outperforms baseline methods, demonstrating superior adaptation to new environ-ments while maintaining stability throughout the domain transitions. 

reflecting a progression in environmental complexity. Finally, the last records contain even more difficult scenarios, such as non-road environments like gas stations and parking lots. The order of domain shifting is consistent with the order reflected in Table 1. After arranging the records by difficulty, we split the 180 records into six groups of 30 records each, representing six consecutive retraining phases. This setup simulates the natural progression of an autonomous vehicle encountering increasingly complex driving scenarios over time. Note that a single environment condition spans mul-tiple phases. For example, the highway condition appears in the first two phases, while the city street condition ap-pears in the last four phases. This arrangement allows us to evaluate how well the model adapts to new scenarios while retaining knowledge from previous conditions. The remaining 20 records are used as a validation set, which is held out to evaluate the model’s performance after each retraining phase. The validation set is sampled in equal proportion to the total dataset distribution, ensuring that the distribution across domains matches the distribution of the entire dataset. When continuous learning is performed effec-tively with appropriate sample selection, the model should adapt smoothly to new domain conditions while retaining knowledge from previous scenarios, which will show lower validation loss. Conversely, poor sample selection may lead to catastrophic forgetting of earlier domains or inadequate adaptation to new, challenging scenarios. 

Sampling methods and implementation details. To eval-uate the effectiveness of our proposed FrameScope sampling approach, we compare it against the following baseline meth-ods adapted from existing literature and established practices in active learning for autonomous driving scenarios: 

• Random sampling serves as the fundamental baseline. It uniformly selects frames without any intelligent criteria. 

• Event-based sampling [32] selects frames when signif-icant changes occur in the scene (e.g., appearance or disappearance of objects). 

• Density-based sampling , also adopted from [32], prior-itizes frames with higher object density as determined by the oracle model predictions (thus requires cloud-side sampling). In all experiments, we apply a consistent sampling rate across methods. The sampling rate denotes the percentage of frames selected from each group of image records for oracle anno-tation and model retraining. For instance, at a 10% sampling rate, approximately 600 frames with the highest FrameScope scores are selected from each retraining phase with 6,000 frames, while the remaining 90% are discarded without pro-cessing. This constraint reflects practical resource limitations SEC ’25, December 3–6, 2025, Arlington, VA, USA Zhu and Yoon 

in autonomous vehicle deployments, where querying and annotation costs and communication bandwidth are major constraints. 

FrameScope scoring implementation: We set the sliding window size to 𝑤 = 5 frames, with a stride of ⌊𝑤 /2⌋ = 2to balance contextual richness and computational efficiency. The temporal decay factor is configured as 𝜆 = 0.8. For computing Scene Dynamics Weight, we use a threshold of 

𝜃 = 0.1. The FrameScope score is computed according to the formulation described in Section 4. We compute scores over overlapping windows to retain temporal context but issue label queries at the frame level to avoid clip-level labeling and uplink overhead. To mitigate forgetting in continual learning, we implement an experience replay mechanism alongside our FrameScope sampling strategy. The replay buffer stores high-value frames from previous phases based on their FrameScope scores. During the retraining phase 𝑝 , the training set combines new samples from the current phase with replay samples from earlier phases 𝑖 < 𝑝 in a fixed 70:30 ratio. The 30% replay portion is allocated across previous phases using a temporal decay weight 𝑤 𝑖 = 𝛾 𝑝 −𝑖 , 𝑖 = 1, . . . , 𝑝 − 1, where 𝛾 ∈ ( 0, 1)

controls the decay rate. These weights are normalized to yield sampling ratios: 

𝑟 𝑖 = 𝑤 𝑖 

Í𝑝 −1 

> 𝑗 =1

𝑤 𝑗 

, 𝑛 𝑖 = 𝑁 replay × 𝑟 𝑖 ,

with each 𝑛 𝑖 sample drawn randomly from phase 𝑖 ’s high-value frames. For example, at phase 𝑝 = 4 with 𝛾 = 0.7, the weights are 𝑤 1 = 0.343 , 𝑤 2 = 0.49 , 𝑤 3 = 0.7, normalizing to ratios 𝑟 1 ≈ 0.22 , 𝑟 2 ≈ 0.32 , 𝑟 3 ≈ 0.46. With 𝑁 replay = 180, this yields about 39, 58, and 83 replay samples from Phases 1, 2, and 3, respectively. This stratified replay strategy ensures temporal diversity while emphasizing more recent experi-ences, which helps preserve prior knowledge and improve adaptation to new domain conditions. 

Computational complexity and memory requirement. 

The filtering loop is training-free: each frame undergoes one forward feature extraction, followed by closed-form tem-poral aggregation over a sliding window. The amortized per-frame time complexity is 𝑂 (𝑑 +𝑤 ): the 𝑂 (𝑑 ) term comes from feature-level operations proportional to the feature di-mension 𝑑 (e.g., dot products, cosine similarity, or simple transforms) that are performed once per frame; the 𝑂 (𝑤 )

term comes from aggregating over a window of length 𝑤 

using cached features (constant-time per position, summed over 𝑤 positions). Because features are computed once and reused while the window slides, we do not re-compute fea-tures 𝑤 times per frame. The working memory scales as 

𝑂 (𝑤𝑑 ) for maintaining a rolling buffer of 𝑤 feature vectors of dimension 𝑑 .

Continuous learning performance. Figure 7 shows the validation loss progression throughout the six-phase geo-graphic domain shifting experiment with a 10% sampling rate. Each training phase comprises 100 training steps as in-dicated by the vertical dashed lines at steps 100, 200, 300, 400, and 500. While experiments were performed for all domain shift cases, we present only the geographic domain results here due to space constraints. All three domain shifts ex-hibited similar trends; we chose to highlight the geographic domain because the changes in scene context are more vi-sually distinct compared to the weather and time domains, and it allows us to showcase clearly different scenarios, such as gas stations and parking lots. The y-axis represents the validation loss computed on a separate validation set held out during training, where lower values indicate better model performance and generalization. The x-axis shows the cumulative retraining steps across all six phases, during which progressively more challenging driving scenarios are introduced. The curves reveal several important insights into the effectiveness of different sam-pling strategies in continuous learning. Initially, all methods start with comparable validation loss, but their trajectories diverge significantly as training progresses through increas-ingly complex driving scenarios. Our FrameScope demonstrates the most stable and con-sistent performance improvement, achieving the lowest final validation loss among all compared approaches. It exhibits smooth convergence without significant performance degra-dation during domain transitions. This indicates effective mitigation of catastrophic forgetting. Event-based and density-based sampling methods show moderate performance but exhibit more fluctuations during domain transitions. While these methods achieve reason-able final results, they lack the stability demonstrated by our FrameScope, particularly during the middle training phases where performance plateaus occur. Event-based sampling reacts only to immediate visual changes and tends to miss gradual domain shifts. For instance, when transitioning from highway to city environments, it may skip important frames that do not trigger object appearance events but contain valuable adaptation information. Density-based sampling relies solely on object counts, which fails to capture the vi-sual complexity necessary for effective domain adaptation. It cannot distinguish between frames containing familiar objects in new contexts and those that provide truly infor-mative learning cues. In contrast, our FrameScope method evaluates each frame’s learning potential through gradient analysis while incorporating temporal context, resulting in more effective frame selection across domain boundaries. Interestingly, random sampling exhibits a distinctive pat-tern characterized by a sudden performance degradation in the final retraining phase, as shown by the sharp increase in FrameScope SEC ’25, December 3–6, 2025, Arlington, VA, USA 

Table 2: AP@50 (car) under a 10% sampling rate after six continual phases. Values are mean AP@50 ± std. The last row shows 95% confidence intervals for the paired AP@50 difference between FrameScope and the best non-FrameScope baseline in each scenario.                    

> Sampling Method Geographic Time Weather
> Random 0.476 ±0.0028 0.472 ±0.0028 0.506 ±0.0028 Density-based 0.484 ±0.0031 0.434 ±0.0034 0.491 ±0.0029 Event-based 0.504 ±0.0029 0.469 ±0.0041 0.509 ±0.0029
> FrameScope 0.529 ±0.0026 0.494 ±0.0027 0.519 ±0.0028
> 95% CI for Δ[0 .022, 0 .028] [0 .019, 0 .026] [0 .006, 0 .012]

validation loss between steps 500 and 550. This observation supports our hypothesis that the final training group con-tains complex and uncommon non-road scenarios, such as gas stations and parking lots. These challenging scenarios likely cause instability in random sampling due to the ab-sence of strategic selection criteria when encountering novel situations that differ significantly from previously seen data. Table 2 presents the final detection accuracy obtained after six continual training phases across three domain-shifting scenarios on BDD100K. Specifically, it shows AP@50 (Av-erage Precision at IoU = 0.50) for the car class, expressed as mean ± standard deviation. AP values are rounded to three decimals and standard deviations to four decimals to reflect empirical uncertainty. The bottom row reports the 95% confidence intervals for the paired AP differences, 

Δ = AP (FrameScope ) − AP (best baseline ), computed via paired bootstrap on the test set (bootstrap replicates 𝐵 =1, 000, test set size 𝑁 =4, 000). An interval crossing zero would im-ply the difference is indistinguishable from evaluation noise. Moreover, the farther the entire interval is from zero, the stronger the evidence that the difference is statistically sig-nificant. The results in Table 2 show that FrameScope is consis-tently superior across all three domain-shifting scenarios. This outperformance is statistically significant, as the 95% confidence intervals for the paired AP differences are strictly positive. Specifically, it achieves the highest AP@50 scores in the geographic (0.529), time (0.494), and weather (0.519) do-mains, representing significant improvements over the best-performing baseline methods in each case. Event-based sam-pling performs well in the geographic and weather scenarios, achieving strong results that outperform density-based and random sampling methods. However, its performance drops significantly in the time domain (0.479), likely because grad-ual lighting changes fail to trigger sufficient event-based selections. Density-based sampling shows inconsistent per-formance across domains, with particularly poor results in the time scenario (0.445). These findings suggest that object 

Table 3: Per-phase communication cost (6,000 frames, 10% selection).                 

> Category Model/Method Uplink Downlink Train-on-Cloud SSD_MobileNet 15.5 GB 27.6 MB (weights) Faster R-CNN 15.5 GB 159.7 MB (weights)
> Filter-on-Cloud Density-based 15.5 GB 1.9 MB (labels) Event-based 15.5 GB 1.3 MB (labels)
> Our Method FrameScope 1.5 GB 0.97 MB (labels)

density alone is not a reliable indicator of frame informative-ness under varying environmental conditions. These results validate our hypothesis that incorporating temporal dynamics and scene dynamics through the FrameScope framework leads to more robust sample selection. The consistent performance gains across diverse domain-shifting scenarios highlight the generalizability of our approach and its practical value for real-world autonomous driving applications, where vehicles encounter varied and continuously evolving environmental conditions. 

Bandwidth requirement. An important practical consid-eration is the bandwidth requirement of different continu-ous learning strategies. Both event-based and density-based (“ Filter-on-Cloud ”) baselines rely on the entire image set to make sampling decisions: event-based sampling tracks object entries and exits across the sequence, while density-based sampling counts objects in every frame. When scoring is per-formed in the cloud, all frames must be transmitted, which inflates network usage and cost. In contrast, FrameScope makes sampling decisions locally using model-internal sig-nals within short windows. Hence, only selected high-value frames are transmitted for oracle annotation. Under a common per-phase budget (6,000 encountered frames with a 10% sampling rate, i.e., 600 labeled samples), Table 3 quantifies the resulting uplink and downlink com-munication volumes. The cloud-training baselines (" Train-on-Cloud ") upload 100% of frames and download updated model weights once per phase (initial weights are a one-time cost and excluded here). The " Filter-on-Cloud " methods also upload all frames for oracle’s scoring and filtering but download only the labels of the post-filtered samples. Note that model weight updates are typically 30-160x larger than label payloads, depending on the model. Our FrameScope performs filtering on-vehicle, uploading only the selected frames ( 90.3% fewer bytes), and downloading only the corre-sponding labels. Consequently, it substantially reduces both uplink and downlink communication volumes, making it better suit deployments with constrained connectivity. SEC ’25, December 3–6, 2025, Arlington, VA, USA Zhu and Yoon 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 

> Training Time (minutes)
> 0.350 0.375 0.400 0.425 0.450 0.475 0.500 0.525 0.550
> Average Precision
> 100% 20% 10% 5%

Figure 8: Training curves comparing different sam-pling rates (5%, 10%, 20%, 100%) using FrameScope un-der time domain shifting. Sampling rate analysis and efficiency considerations. 

To investigate the trade-off between annotation cost (mea-sured by the number of frames selected for oracle labeling and model retraining) and model performance, we analyze our FrameScope method under varying sampling rates in the time domain shifting scenario. Specifically, we compare sampling rates of 5%, 10%, 20%, and 100% (the full dataset baseline). Figure 8 shows the training progression curves, illustrating the average precision on the BDD100K car class over six continuous training phases. The results reveal several key insights into the trade-offs between sampling efficiency and resource utilization in con-tinuous learning scenarios. Most notably, all sub-sampling rates (5%, 10%, and 20%) exhibit similar convergence behav-ior during the initial training phases. This suggests that our FrameScope method effectively identifies the most infor-mative frames, even under tight annotation budgets. The stability of early-stage performance supports the theoreti-cal foundation of our approach—that the high-value frames selected by FrameScope contain sufficient information to enable effective initial model adaptation. As expected, higher sampling rates lead to better final performance, with the 100% baseline achieving the highest average precision of approximately 0.552. However, the 20% sampling rate yields competitive results with an average pre-cision of 0.522—only a 4.7% drop—while requiring 80% fewer samples and substantially lower bandwidth consumption. Even more notably, the 10% sampling rate maintains reason-able performance at 0.494, demonstrating that our method can achieve roughly 90% of the full-dataset performance using just 10% of the data. From a practical deployment perspective, these results highlight the necessity and benefits of principled sampling strategies in resource-constrained environments. Bandwidth requirements scale linearly with the sampling rate—moving from 5% to 20% sampling increases network transmission costs by a factor of four, while using the full 100% dataset leads to a 20-fold increase. Our 10% sampling approach of-fers a proper balance by achieving about 90% of the full-dataset performance while reducing bandwidth consump-tion by roughly an order of magnitude, thus serving as a practical default for deployment. Furthermore, the superior early-stage performance of our proposed sampling method addresses a fundamental chal-lenge in autonomous vehicle deployment: the need for rapid model adaptation to new environmental conditions. In sce-narios such as entering unfamiliar geographic regions or encountering sudden weather changes, the ability to quickly adapt using minimal data while maintaining competitive performance offers a critical advantage over methods that rely on extensive data collection and processing. 

## 6 Conclusion 

In this paper, we presented FrameScope, the first system to extend neural tangent kernel theory to the temporal domain for data valuation in autonomous vehicle systems. Our ap-proach addresses key limitations of existing methods that rely on heuristic sampling and fail to capture the tempo-ral dynamics inherent in video streams. We introduced the Temporal Neural Tangent Kernel (TNTK) framework, which incorporates both temporal dependencies among frames and scene dynamics to enable principled frame selection. Com-prehensive experimental results demonstrated the practi-cal utility of our approach in real-world settings, particu-larly under bandwidth and computational constraints. Future work will explore adaptive hyperparameter tuning, multi-modal integration, and cross-domain applications. Overall, the FrameScope framework marks a step toward bridging theoretical data valuation and practical streaming applica-tions and establishes a new paradigm for intelligent data selection in continuous learning scenarios. 

## References        

> [1] Jordan T. Ash, Chicheng Zhang, Akshay Krishnamurthy, John Lang-ford, and Alekh Agarwal. 2020. Deep Batch Active Learning by Diverse, Uncertain Gradient Lower Bounds. In Proceedings of the 8th Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020 .[2] Davide Cacciarelli and Murat Kulahci. 2025. Active learning for indus-trial applications. Quality Engineering 37, 2 (2025), 175–184. [3] Li Deng. 2012. The mnist database of handwritten digit images for machine learning research. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine 29, 6 (2012), 141–142. [4] Yarin Gal, Riashat Islam, and Zoubin Ghahramani. 2017. Deep Bayesian Active Learning with Image Data. In Proceedings of the 34th Interna-tional Conference on Machine Learning , Vol. 70. 1183–1192. [5] Shilpa George, Haithem Turki, Ziqiang Feng, Deva Ramanan, Padman-abhan Pillai, and Mahadev Satyanarayanan. 2023. Low-Bandwidth Self-Improving Transmission of Rare Training Data. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual International Conference on Mobile Computing and

FrameScope SEC ’25, December 3–6, 2025, Arlington, VA, USA 

Networking . Article 86, 15 pages. doi:10.1145/3570361.3613300 [6] Amirata Ghorbani and James Zou. 2019. Data Shapley: Equitable Valuation of Data for Machine Learning. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning , Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (Eds.), Vol. 97. 2242–2251. [7] Neil Houlsby, Ferenc Huszár, Zoubin Ghahramani, and Máté Lengyel. 2011. Bayesian Active Learning for Classification and Preference Learning. arXiv:1112.5745 [stat.ML] https://arxiv.org/abs/1112.5745 [8] Andrew G. Howard, Menglong Zhu, Bo Chen, Dmitry Kalenichenko, Weijun Wang, Tobias Weyand, Marco Andreetto, and Hartwig Adam. 2017. MobileNets: Efficient Convolutional Neural Networks for Mobile Vision Applications. arXiv:1704.04861 [cs.CV] https://arxiv.org/abs/ 1704.04861 [9] Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clement Hongler. 2018. Neural Tangent Kernel: Convergence and Generalization in Neural Networks. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grau-man, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett (Eds.), Vol. 31. Curran Asso-ciates, Inc. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2018/file/ 5a4be1fa34e62bb8a6ec6b91d2462f5a-Paper.pdf [10] Ruoxi Jia, David Dao, Boxin Wang, Frances Ann Hubis, Nick Hynes, Nezihe Merve Gürel, Bo Li, Ce Zhang, Dawn Song, and Costas J. Spanos. 2019. Towards Efficient Data Valuation Based on the Shapley Value. In 

Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , Vol. 89. 1167–1176. [11] Pang Wei Koh and Percy Liang. 2017. Understanding Black-box Predic-tions via Influence Functions. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning , Vol. 70. 1885–1894. [12] Alex Krizhevsky and Geoffrey Hinton. 2009. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images . Technical Report. University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario. https://www.cs.toronto.edu/~kriz/learning-features-2009-TR.pdf [13] Punit Kumar and Atul Gupta. 2020. Active learning query strategies for classification, regression, and clustering: A survey. Journal of Computer Science and Technology 35 (2020), 913–945. [14] David D. Lewis and Jason Catlett. 1994. Heterogeneous Uncertainty Sampling for Supervised Learning. In Machine Learning Proceedings 1994 . Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco (CA), 148–156. doi:10.1016/ B978-1-55860-335-6.50026-X [15] Lincan Li, Wei Shao, Wei Dong, Yijun Tian, Qiming Zhang, Kaixiang Yang, and Wenjie Zhang. 2024. Data-Centric Evolution in Autonomous Driving: A Comprehensive Survey of Big Data System, Data Mining, and Closed-Loop Technologies. arXiv:2401.12888 [cs.RO] https://arxiv. org/abs/2401.12888 [16] Wei Liu, Dragomir Anguelov, Dumitru Erhan, Christian Szegedy, Scott Reed, Cheng-Yang Fu, and Alexander C. Berg. 2016. SSD: Single Shot MultiBox Detector. In Proceedings of the 14th European Conference on Computer Vision . Springer International Publishing, Cham, 21–37. [17] Shaoqing Ren, Kaiming He, Ross Girshick, and Jian Sun. 2015. Faster R-CNN: Towards Real-Time Object Detection with Region Proposal Networks. In Proceedings of the 28th Annual Conference on Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , C. Cortes, N. Lawrence, D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, and R. Garnett (Eds.), Vol. 28. Curran Associates, Inc. [18] Amanda Rios, Ibrahima Ndiour, Parual Datta, Jerry Sydir, Omesh Tickoo, and Nilesh Ahuja. 2024. CUAL: Continual Uncertainty-aware Active Learner. arXiv:2412.09701 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/2412. 09701 [19] Nicholas Roy and Andrew McCallum. 2001. Toward Optimal Active Learning through Sampling Estimation of Error Reduction. In Proceed-ings of the 18th International Conference on Machine Learning . 441–448. [20] Ozan Sener and Silvio Savarese. 2018. Active Learning for Convolu-tional Neural Networks: A Core-Set Approach. In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Learning Representations .[21] Burr Settles. 2009. Active learning literature survey . Technical Report 1648. University of Wisconsin–Madison. [22] Burr Settles and Mark Craven. 2008. An analysis of active learning strategies for sequence labeling tasks. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing . 1070–1079. [23] H. S. Seung, M. Opper, and H. Sompolinsky. 1992. Query by committee. In Proceedings of the 5th Annual Workshop on Computational Learning Theory . 287–294. doi:10.1145/130385.130417 [24] Lloyd S Shapley. 1953. A value for n-person games. Contributions to the Theory of Games 2, 28 (1953), 307–317. [25] Connor Shorten and Taghi M Khoshgoftaar. 2019. A survey on image data augmentation for deep learning. Journal of big data 6, 1 (2019), 1–48. [26] Pei Sun, Henrik Kretzschmar, Xerxes Dotiwalla, Aurelien Chouard, Vi-jaysai Patnaik, Paul Tsui, James Guo, Yin Zhou, Yuning Chai, Benjamin Caine, Vijay Vasudevan, Wei Han, Jiquan Ngiam, Hang Zhao, Aleksei Timofeev, Scott Ettinger, Maxim Krivokon, Amy Gao, Aditya Joshi, Yu Zhang, Jonathon Shlens, Zhifeng Chen, and Dragomir Anguelov. 2020. Scalability in Perception for Autonomous Driving: Waymo Open Dataset. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition .[27] Sebastian Thrun and Tom M Mitchell. 1995. Lifelong robot learning. 

Robotics and autonomous systems 15, 1-2 (1995), 25–46. doi:10.1016/ 0921-8890(95)00004-Y [28] Linh Trinh, Ali Anwar, and Siegfried Mercelis. 2024. Data Selection Method for Assessment of Autonomous Vehicles. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems .3539–3545. doi:10.1109/ITSC58415.2024.10919650 [29] Zhaoxuan Wu, Yao Shu, and Bryan Kian Hsiang Low. 2022. DAVINZ: Data Valuation using Deep Neural Networks at Initialization. In Pro-ceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning ,Vol. 162. 24150–24176. [30] Yazhou Yang and Marco Loog. 2018. A benchmark and comparison of active learning for logistic regression. Pattern Recognition 83 (2018), 401–415. doi:10.1016/j.patcog.2018.06.004 [31] Fisher Yu, Haofeng Chen, Xin Wang, Wenqi Xian, Yingying Chen, Fangchen Liu, Vashisht Madhavan, and Trevor Darrell. 2020. BDD100K: A Diverse Driving Dataset for Heterogeneous Multitask Learning. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition .[32] Yuheng Zhu, Dhruva Ungrupulithaya, Boluo Ge, and Man-Ki Yoon. 2024. AdaptAV: Continuous Adaption of Vision Models for Au-tonomous Vehicles Using Cloud-based Oracle. In Proceedings of the 100th Vehicular Technology Conference . doi:10.1109/VTC2024-Fall63153. 2024.10757493