Top-down Traffic Scenario Generation via Joint Initial-Goal Diffusion
and Trajectory Infilling
Da Saem Lee, Yash Vardhan Pant, Sebastian Fischmeister
Abstract— Robust traffic simulators are crucial for develop-
ing and testing autonomous vehicles to reduce the costly, labor-
intensive real-world data collection process and the need for
physical presence on the road. However, existing simulators
require agents’ initial states to generate trajectories, which
limits scalability and diversity due to restrictions on the given
initial states. While data-driven agent initialization has been
widely studied, the generated initial states are not interpretable
in terms of why the agents are initialized at those specific
locations. Given known initial states, trajectory generation
is also a challenging problem, as the model must learn the
variability of the destination and how agents should reach it
over time. In this paper, we propose TrafficDiffuser, a top-down
traffic scenario generation framework that generates high-
level traffic scenarios, defined by initial and goal state pairs,
by jointly modeling them. The high-level scenario generation
makes initial states better interpretable and reduces trajectory
generation into as simple as an infilling problem. We demon-
strate how the generated high-level traffic scenarios can be used,
including constraining based on different trajectory modes and
integrating them with existing trajectory generation models.
We conduct extensive experiments on the Argoverse 2 motion
prediction dataset to evaluate how well the generated outputs
capture real-world distributions. In addition to generating goal
states, TrafficDiffuser outperforms the next-best approach for
agent initialization, reducing speed distribution distance by
55.3% and the off-road rate by 2.8%. 1
I. INTRODUCTION
When developing the autonomous system, exposure to
diverse traffic scenarios is crucial to ensure safety and
adaptability. However, obtaining and manually annotating
real-world datasets that capture such diversity is both time-
consuming and costly [1]. To mitigate this, data-driven
simulators [2], [3] focuses on generating synthetic traffic
scenarios to create data samples. Typically, this process is
decoupled into two tasks: generating initial agent states [4],
[5] and then synthesizing the corresponding trajectories [2].
For multi-agent scenarios, generating a realistic set of
initial agent states is important for diversifying the scenario.
While prior data-driven approaches [4], [5] model the initial
states and interactions conditioned on the map, they often
lack interpretability, as it is difficult to understand the under-
lying intent of the generated states. By treating initialization
This work is supported in part by the Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada (NSERC), Canada Foundation for Innovation
- John R. Evans Leaders Fund (CFI JELF), Mitacs, and Intact Financial
Corporation.
The
authors
are
with
the
Department
of
Electrical
and
Computer
Engineering,
University
of
Waterloo,
Waterloo,
Canada.
ds3lee@uwaterloo.ca, yash.pant@uwaterloo.ca,
sfischme@uwaterloo.ca
1https://github.com/CL2-UWaterloo/TrafficDiffuser
(a) High-level traffic scenario
(b) Infilled trajectories
Fig. 1.
Illustration of proposed approach. (a) Generated high-level traffic
scenario. (b) Infilled trajectories conditioned on the high-level scenario.
as a task to capture a single timestep of scenarios, these
models provide limited context to trajectory generation.
With the given initial traffic scene, trajectory generation
has been studied to complete the scenario generation pro-
cess [2], [6]. Effective trajectory generation requires the
model to capture agents’ intentions and behaviors. In tra-
jectory prediction tasks, given the initial states and past tra-
jectories, prior works [7], [8] focus on predicting goal points
and motions between the initial and predicted goal points to
improve prediction accuracy in unseen map structures.
In this paper, we introduce TrafficDiffuser, a diffusion-
based framework that generates traffic scenarios in a top-
down, goal-conditioned manner. As illustrated in Fig. 1(a),
the initial and goal states are jointly modeled to gener-
ate high-level scenarios which allows inherently learning
feasible paths between endpoints. This high-level scenario
simplifies the complex trajectory generation into a goal-
conditioned infilling task as shown in Fig. 1(b). Fig. 2
provides an overview of the proposed framework, which inte-
grates high-level scenario generation with trajectory infilling.
The contributions of our approaches are as follows:
• Interpretability: Jointly generated start-goal pair pro-
vides better interpretability of the initial traffic scenes
and agent intentions.
• Feasible path generation: The model synthesizes fea-
sible start-goal configurations for multi-agent scenarios.
• Simplified Trajectory Generation: Leveraging high-
level traffic scenarios enables simplified trajectory gen-
eration through goal-conditioned infilling.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II reviews prior works, Section III introduces notation,
problem setup, and preliminaries, Section IV details our
approach, and Section V presents experimental results and
comparisons. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper and
discusses future work.
Copyright © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved. This is the accepted version of the paper.The final version will be published
in the IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), 2026
arXiv:2608.11407v1  [cs.RO]  11 Aug 2026


B. Trajectory Infilling
Social Attention
Map-Agent Attn
Infilled Trajectory
Infiller
SeqEncoder
Map
Encoder
Noisy scenario
A. High-Level Traffic Scenario Generation
Map-Agent Attn
Social Attention
Heterogeneous Message Passing Layer
Attention Layer
Legend:
Map summary-Agent
TrafficGenerator
Temporal Attention
Social Attention
Map-Agent Attention
HD map
Denoised          
scenario          
Bridge     
Encoded         
map         
Map
Encoder
HD
map
Encoded            
map summary           
Encoded map       
Differential Transformer
Fig. 2.
Overview of TrafficDiffuser. In A, a noisy scenario state, map summary, and map are processed by the TrafficGenerator ϵθ to produce a denoised
high-level scenario ˆs0, which consists of initial and goal states. In B, the denoised scenario is then passed to infiller fϕ to connect between the generated
initial and goal states with kinematically feasible trajectories ˆτ.
II. RELATED WORKS
In this section, we review existing works for traffic
scenario generation. We specifically focus on data-driven
approaches that initialize agents in the scene, predict or
generate their future trajectories, and end-to-end approaches.
Earlier works [9], [10] represented traffic scenarios using
rasterized images, by encoding individual features in each
channel. To improve computational efficiency by eliminating
redundancy, recent works employ vectorized representations
of the map structure [11], [12]. SceneControl [4] leverages
diffusion models with transformer decoder layers to generate
initial states of the agents in the scene. While SceneControl
demonstrates controllable agent initialization on diverse sce-
narios, it requires guidance sampling [13] to enforce realism,
such as collision avoidance and road compliance.
With known initial states, trajectory prediction or genera-
tion tasks are widely studied using vectorized map represen-
tations. For trajectory generation, Ctrl-Sim [6] introduces a
simulator trained using offline reinforcement learning (RL).
The real-world driving logs are replayed on the Nocturne
simulator [14] to generate an offline RL dataset. In the
trajectory prediction domain, Trajeglish [15] formulates tra-
jectory prediction as a next token prediction problem us-
ing predefined motion tokens. To enhance generalizability,
Holigraph Goal [7] proposes a goal-prediction and goal-
based trajectory-prediction approach that leverages the lane
structure. While these approaches predict or generate feasible
trajectories, they require past trajectories and initial states,
which makes it difficult to generate or predict the trajectories.
To further enhance diversity, generating both agent ini-
tialization and trajectories has been widely explored. PathD-
iffuser [16] proposes a two-stage diffusion-based approach
for traffic scenario generation. For agent initial scene gen-
eration, the differential transformer [17] is used to narrow
down the attention to the map components. For trajectory
generation, candidate trajectories are defined in the Frenet
coordinate system while reducing reliance on past motions
and improving map compliance in adversarial scenarios.
ScenarioDreamer [3] also proposes a two-stage approach to
traffic scenario generation. The scene initialization employs
a latent diffusion model that uses latent embeddings captured
from a VAE model to represent lane segments and agents’
states. Then, the closed-loop simulator from Ctrl-Sim [6] is
leveraged for trajectory generation. SceneDiffuser [2] utilizes
v-prediction [18] to train the diffusion model by using a
control mask for controllable generation in both scenario
generation and behavior prediction. By using the proposed
amortized diffusion, a single denoising function generates
future trajectory predictions by refining buffered predictions
from previous steps. While these approaches enable the
traffic scenario generation, agents’ high-level intent is not
modeled during initialization, which limits the interpretabil-
ity of the initial states of the resulting traffic scenario.
Most existing works generate diverse traffic scenarios by
factorizing the problem into two stages: generating initial
states and then generating trajectories. In contrast, we pro-
pose a top-down diffusion-based approach that first generates
high-level scenarios, then infills trajectories.
III. PROBLEM STATEMENTS AND PRELIMINARIES
This section presents the mathematical notations, the
problem formulation, and a brief overview of the diffusion
process underlying our approach.
A. Notation
The vectorized map consists of road elements, including
map polygons and map points, whose embeddings are de-
noted by M. We consider a scene with N agents and a time
horizon H, with intermediate timestep h ∈{0, 1, . . . , H}.
The state of agent i at a given timestep is defined as ai =
[xi, yi, vi, ci] ∈R4, where (xi, yi) ∈R2 denotes position,
vi ∈R+ the speed, and ci ∈Z+ the agent type. The joint
state of all agents in the scene at time step h is sh =
[a1, . . . , aN] ∈RN×4. The high-level traffic scenarios are
denoted by sHL = [s0, sH]. We denote a positional trajectory
of agent i over the time as τi = [(x, y)i,1, . . . , (x, y)i,H],
trajectories for all agents as τ = [τ1, . . . , τN], and trajectory
at time h as τh. The real-world distribution is denoted as
q(.), and the learned distribution is denoted as pθ(.). We
denote generated states and predicted trajectories using the
hat notation, e.g., ˆτ and ˆs.
B. Problem Statement
Given a map M and the number of agents N, our goal is to
develop a generative model that approximates the distribution
of traffic scenarios from a real-world dataset q(τ|M), so
that the sampled data from learned distribution pθ(τ|M)
resembles the real-world data.


Unlike existing approaches, we propose decomposing the
problem using the concept of a high-level traffic scenario.
We define a high-level traffic scenario sHL = [s0, sH], which
consists of the initial states s0 and the goal states sH for all
N agents in the map. Using this concept, the problem is
decomposed as follows:
Problem 1: (High-level
Traffic
Scenario
Generation)
Given a map M and the number of agents N, develop a
generative model which enables sampling high-level scenar-
ios sHL from pθ(sHL|M) that resembles samples from the
true distribution q(sHL|M).
Problem 2: (Trajectory Infilling) Given a map M and
high-level scenarios sHL, develop a model for goal-
conditioned trajectory prediction that infills trajectories τ
between the sampled initial s0 and goal states sH.
C. Diffusion Model
Among existing generative models, denoising diffusion
probabilistic models (DDPM) [19] have shown promising
results across a variety of domains. DDPM corrupts data
with Gaussian noise in a forward pass based on the schedule,
and learns to iteratively reverse this process to recover the
samples from the original distribution.
Forward Process. The distribution of the agent’s initial and
goal states is denoted by q(sHL). Over the diffusion steps
T, Gaussian noise is iteratively added as follows:
q(st
HL|st−1
HL, M) := N

st
HL;
p
1 −βt st−1
HL, βt I

where t ∈{0, 1, . . . , T} is the diffusion steps, βt is the
predefined variance schedule at step t. Using the Markov
property, samples at any step t can be written as:
q(st
HL|s0
HL) = N
 st
HL; √¯αt s0
HL, (1 −¯αt) I

in which αt = 1−βt represents the variance preserving term
and ¯αt = Qt
s=1 αs controls the noise schedule.
Reverse Process. In the reverse process pθ(s0:T
HL), noisy data
is initially drawn from the prior distribution pθ(sT
HL) =
N(sT
HL; 0, I). Then, the noisy sample is gradually denoised
to recover a noise-free sample, which can be considered as
the transition from st
HL to st−1
HL and expressed as follows:
pθ(st−1
HL|st
HL) = N(st−1
HL; µθ(st
HL, t), σ2
t I)
where σ2
t = βt
1−¯αt−1
1−¯αt . Moreover, estimating added noise
ϵ is mathematically equivalent to estimating the clean data
sHL but offers better stability.
Guidance Sampling. The reverse process can be guided
to steer denoising towards the desired output. While some
approaches introduce an additional classifier network to ap-
proximate the guidance [13], they require additional training
and inference costs. To reduce the computational cost, some
works
[4], [20], [21] define the guidance cost function
J (x0) to reflect the desired characteristics, where x0 is the
clean data. Then, during the reverse process, the denoised
data ˆx0(xt) is reconstructed by estimating the noise. By
taking the gradient ∇xtJ (ˆx0(xt)), it is injected to bias
the denoising process. For instance, as in SceneControl [4],
during the reverse process, we can steer the agent’s location
by biasing with the gradient of the guidance cost function.
In our task, we apply this principle to guide sHL by
perturbing the noise prediction as in Eq. 1.
ˆϵθ(st
HL, M) ←ϵθ(st
HL, M) −λguide∇st
HLJ (ˆs0
HL),
(1)
where λguide ∈R+ is the guidance scale.
IV. TRAFFICDIFFUSER: APPROACH
Building upon the preliminaries and notations in Sec-
tion III, we propose a hierarchical diffusion framework for
top-down traffic scenario generation.
A. High-Level Traffic Scenario Generation
As formulated in Problem 1, we first aim to generate the
high-level traffic scenarios that resemble the true distribution
by jointly modeling the initial and goal states. To learn the
real-world distribution, we leverage a DDPM [19] formula-
tion, and the reverse process ϵθ(st
0,H, M, t) is parameterized
to estimate noise at each diffusion step t, given the map M
and the number of agents N.
1) Architecture: Based on the DDPM formulation, we
now describe the detailed architecture of our framework.
As illustrated in Fig. 2A, the high-level scenario generation
model consists of a map encoder and a traffic generator.
Map Encoder To efficiently encode the vectorized map
structure, we adopt and modify the map encoder from
QCNet [22]. Since the goal is to generate the initial states on
the map, the map point and map polygon nodes are encoded
with their positions and orientations. Then, as illustrated in
Fig. 3, map polygon nodes attend map point nodes to learn
how the lane is internally structured, and other polygons
to learn how they are connected. Moreover, we introduce
a map summary layer to summarize the map by attending to
encoded map polygons.
Points-
Polygon Attn
Polygon-
Polygon Attn
Map-
Summary Attn
HD map
HMP Layer
Attention Layer
Legend:
Fig. 3.
Map encoder architecture. Map polygons are encoded using a
heterogeneous message passing (HMP) layer that attends to corresponding
map points and surrounding map polygons. Then, the learnable embedding
Msum attends the encoded map polygons to summarize the map structure.
Traffic Generator When generating realistic high-level traf-
fic scenarios, the model needs to generate a valid path for
each agent while not colliding with other agents. As in the
agent initialization model in PathDiffuser [16], we adopt
the differential transformer [17] to promote the sparse map
attention. Unlike PathDiffuser [16] and SceneControl [4], our
model attends to map polygon embeddings to reduce the
number of attention operations to learn the map structure.
An overview of the traffic generator is shown in Fig 2A.
To encode the high-level scenario, we consider the problem
as encoding a sequence of length two, i.e., initial and goal
states. Each states are independently encoded with time and
agent identity embeddings to maintain temporal and social
distinction during the attention operations. The denoising


process follows a sequence of attention layers to fuse multi-
modal constraints. First, noisy samples attend to a map
summary to provide a global spatial context of the given
map. This is followed by temporal self-attention to ensure
consistency between an agent’s own initial and goal states.
Then, the sample attends to other agents through a social
cross-attention layer to capture the interaction among agents.
Lastly, it attends the local map embeddings to condition on
the geometry of the given map structure.
2) Loss: The training objective is to maximize the Varia-
tional Lower Bound, but, as shown in [19], it can be reduced
to predicting noise. By reparameterizing the objective for
our high-level scenario sHL generation, the training objective
reduces to the following loss function:
LHL(θ) = E
hϵ −ϵθ
 st
HL, M, t
2i
(2)
To further promote sparser map attention, an additional
loss term is introduced to minimize the entropy of the atten-
tion weights, as in Eq. 3. As the differential transformer [17]
can output negative attention weights, the attention weights
are normalized for entropy computation.
Lent(θ) = E [−˜wi log( ˜wi)]
(3)
where
˜wi
=
|wi,j|
||wi||2 represents the normalized attention
weights of map token j for agent i, wi,j denotes the attention
weight between agent i and map token j, |.| denotes element-
wise absolute value, and ||.||2 denotes l2-norm of attention
weights for agent i across all map tokens.
By combining the Eq. 2 and Eq. 3, the model is trained
using the following loss function:
L(θ) = LHL(θ) + λentLent(θ),
where λent ∈R+ is a hyperparameter.
B. Trajectory Infilling
In existing trajectory prediction or generation problem for-
mulations, the model must capture how the agent’s trajectory
rolls out from the initial states or the past trajectories, which
requires learning the agent’s destination and its behavior
along the way. However, with the generated high-level sce-
narios, the trajectory generation problem can be simplified
into a goal-conditioned infilling problem, and the model only
needs to know how the agent travels to the goal states.
1) Architecture: Given the high-level traffic scenarios, we
propose using a line between them as a bridge and designing
a model in Fig. 2B to predict the distance from the bridge
over time, as illustrated in Fig. 4.
As Algorithm 1 describes, to introduce more flexibility to
our approach, the infilling model uses a unified architecture
that accommodates different constraint settings within a
single framework. Specifically, we consider the following
cases: (i) hard constraints (HC) on both initial and goal states,
(ii) HC on initial states only, (iii) HC on goal states only,
and (iv) no HC. Hard constraints set the predicted distance
values to zero at the corresponding timestep. Given the initial
and goal states, the bridge B is constructed between them
Bridge
Goal
Infilled Trajectory
Fig. 4.
Illustration of Trajectory Infilling. Given a “bridge” (see Sec. IV-
B.1) between the initial and goal states, a trajectory is produced by refining
the predicted distance from the bridge on each time step.
Algorithm 1 Trajectory Infilling
Input: map M, high-level scenario sHL, time horizon H,
mode m ∼{HCboth, HCinit, HCgoal, HCnone}
1: h ←[ i−1
H−1]H
i=1
▷Linearly spaced time vector in [0, 1]
2: B ←(s0
H −s0
0)h
▷Create evenly spaced bridge
3: γ ←









h(1 −h)
if m = HCboth
1 −h
if m = HCinit
h
if m = HCgoal
1
otherwise
▷Mode-based
weight
4: ˆτ ←B + γfϕ(M, B, m)
5: return ˆτ
and treated as an anchor. Based on the randomly sampled
training mode m, the model learns to handle different modes
while predicting the distance to the bridge B. After the initial
distance estimation, the trajectory is refined by attending to
the map and other agents. The weights γ are multiplied to
apply the constraint depending on the sampled mode.
2) Loss: The trajectory infilling model fϕ(.) learns to
predict the distance from the bridge B, by using the following
loss function:
Ltraj(ϕ) = Lrecon(ϕ) + λsLsmooth(ˆτ),
where λs is a hyperparameter to balance temporal smooth-
ing and accuracy. The reconstruction loss is defined as
Lrecon(ϕ) = ||ˆτ −τ||2, where the predicted trajectory is
reconstructed as ˆτ = B + γfϕ(M, B, m). To avoid abrupt
motions, a smoothness penalty is introduced asLsmooth(ˆτ) =
PH
h=0 ||ˆτh+1−ˆτh||2, which computes the mean squared first-
order difference over the trajectory horizon.
V. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we demonstrate the generation of high-level
traffic scenarios. We show how the jointly generated initial
and goal states improve the interpretability by providing
more context for each agent’s initial placement. Also, we
show how the generated high-level traffic scenarios can
be leveraged for trajectory generation, demonstrating their
compatibility through experiments.
A. Experimental Setup
1) Dataset: Argoverse 2 Motion Forecasting Dataset [1],
which is a large-scale real-world dataset for motion planning
and prediction, is used to capture the distribution of real-
world traffic scenarios. As explained in Section III, for


Map A
Map B
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Scenario 4
Fig. 5.
Diversity in Generated High-level Traffic Scenario. Each row contains an identical map, and the number of agents, and each column shows
different scenarios. Blue dots indicate the initial positions, and red stars indicate the final positions. The line connecting the two points denotes an
initial-goal pair. Generated high-level scenarios show reachable pairs. More visualization is available at https://github.com/CL2-UWaterloo/
TrafficDiffuser.
TABLE I
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF HIGH-LEVEL TRAFFIC SCENARIO GENERATION
Common Sense Metrics ↓
Distributional JSD ↓
Collision rate (%)
Off road rate (%)
Near. edge (m)
Speed
Lat. Dev.
Local Density
Near. Dist.
Initial States
GT
0.50
1.70
1.58
-
-
-
-
SC [4]
4.40
5.25
1.63
0.16
0.212
0.177
0.092
PD-init [16]
4.22
5.36
1.64
0.1524
0.213
0.175
0.089
Ours
9.80
5.10
1.81
0.068
0.200
0.201
0.101
Goal States
GT
0.50
2.80
1.86
-
-
-
-
Ours
10.6
7.21
2.02
0.08
0.198
0.206
0.103
diffusion models, unit-variance Gaussian noise is added
based on the predefined schedule during the forward process.
For training, the input data should be scaled to have a
variance comparable to that of the noise, ensuring meaningful
signal-to-noise ratios. Therefore, during data preprocessing,
the speed and positions of the agents and map components
are z-normalized using the mean and standard deviation of
the agents’ initial and final states. We consider 5 agent
categories: vehicle, bus, pedestrian, bicycle, and motorcycle.
B. High-level Traffic Scenario
1) Baselines: Although we generate both initial and goal
states of the agents in the scene, we compare our initial-
ization results against the most relevant agent initialization
approaches in the literature. Specifically, we evaluate against
SceneControl(SC) [4] replica, as it is not publicly available,
and PathDiffuser’s agent initialization (PD-Init) [16].
2) Performance Measure: The generated high-level traffic
scenarios contain two time steps, and each time step is
evaluated separately. As in [4], [16], [23], we assess the
realism of the generated scenarios using Common Sense and
Jensen-Shannon Divergence (JSD). Common Sense includes
(i) Collision Rate, which measures the ratio of collided
agents, (ii) Off-road Rate, which measures the ratio of off-
road agents, and (iii) the distance to the nearest lane center
point(Near. Edge). To measure the distributional distance be-
tween ground truth and generated output, the distributions are
estimated using histograms. Then, using JSD, the distance
is measured for (i) Speed, (ii) distance to the nearest lane
center (Lat. Dev.), (iii) distance to 5 nearest agents (Local
Density), and (iv) distance to the nearest agent (Near. Dist.).
3) Quantitative Results: Table I shows the evaluation
results for initial and goal states in separate rows. Although
the task became more complex by modeling the high-level
traffic scenario, we observe that the off-road rate is reduced
by 2.8% compared to the PD-init. In terms of JSD, speed
distribution is closer to the ground truth by 55.3%, compared
to the speed output distribution of SC. Also, we observe
that TrafficDiffuser shows an increase in the collision rate
and the distance to the nearest edge, which is expected as
we use encodings of map polygons instead of map points.
For fair comparison, the results reported in Table I were
obtained without the use of guidance sampling. As shown in
SceneControl [4], guidance sampling can improve realism,
which improves quantitative and qualitative results.
4) Qualitative Results: Generated high-level traffic sce-
narios are visualized in Fig. 5. We observe that the generated
high-level scenario consists of pairs of points, the initial


TABLE II
QUANTITATIVE EVALUATION OF TRAJECTORY INFILLING
Model
Hard Constraints
ADE
(m)↓
FDE
(m) ↓
MR
(%) ↓
Ours
Initial and Goal States
0.52
0
0
Initial States
0.53
0.16
0.19
Goal States
0.53
0
0
None
0.53
0.1
0.04
PD-init [16]
Initial States
1.86
7.16
43.84
and goal states of the same agent, with reachable paths on
the map. To show the diversity of generated scenarios, we
generate multiple scenarios from the identical map. Each row
in Fig. 5 shares the same map, while each column displays
variations with a different number of agents. To leverage the
benefit of diffusion models, guidance sampling, explained in
Sec. III-C, is used to bias the reverse process. As guidance
functions, the distances to neighboring agents and to the lane
center are used.
5) Interpretability: One of the main contributions of the
proposed framework is that the generated initial states are
better interpretable. While baseline approaches only generate
agent initial states, our approach provides agents’ initial
states with their intent by indicating where the vehicle is
trying to reach. For instance, as shown in Fig. 5, each
agent is explicitly paired with a corresponding goal state.
By comparing the initial and goal states, we can infer the
vehicle’s intention. A close distance between them indi-
cates the vehicle is stationary, whereas a larger distance
between them indicates a moving vehicle. Compared to
existing approaches, initial-goal pairing enhances scenario
interpretability by showing the underlying intent of each
agent and provides a preview of the traffic scenario.
C. Trajectory Infilling
Given the map and high-level traffic scenarios, trajectory
generation can be simplified to a goal-conditioned trajectory
prediction by connecting the initial and end states.
1) Metrics: As the trajectories are infilled by fixing the
initial and goal states, we evaluate the trajectories by com-
paring with the groundtruth using standard metric for motion
prediction [6], [7], which are (1) Average Displacement
Error (ADE) that measures average displacement across the
prediction horizon H, (2) Final Displacement Error (FDE)
that measures the displacement error of the final states, and
(3) Miss Rate (MR) that evaluates the rate of agents with
FDE is above 2 meters.
2) Quantitative Results: As shown in Table II, MR is all
zero, and ADE is close to groundtruth, which is expected
since we use the bridge B between initial and goal position
as an anchor. Also, as the weight γ forces the distance to
zero under the given constraints, we observe that FDE is zero
if the goal states are fixed.
3) Qualitative Results: Fig. 6 shows infilled trajectories
between the high-level scenarios. We can observe that, given
high-level scenarios, the model produces trajectories between
the initial and goal states while following the map structure,
even when changing lanes or turning left.
Fig. 6.
Visualization of Trajectory Infilling. Given the ground-truth
initial and goal states, the model infills the states by connecting them with
a kinematically feasible trajectory.
D. End-to-end Process for Complete Scenario Generation
We now evaluate the entire pipeline, in which the gen-
erated multi-agent high-level traffic scenarios are used to
produce trajectories. As illustrated in Fig. 7(a), the high-
level scenario consists of synthesized pairs of agents. Then,
Fig. 7(b) shows the predicted trajectory using our trajectory
infilling model.
Compatibility with Existing Trajectory Generator To
demonstrate how the generated high-level scenarios can be
used, we integrate them with the trajectory generation model
from PathDiffuser (PD-Traj) [16]. As Fig. 7(c) shows, our
high-level traffic scenario generator can be combined with
an existing trajectory generation model to promote diverse
traffic scenario generation.
VI. DISCUSSION
Summary. We presented TrafficDiffuser, a framework that
factorizes the multi-agent traffic scenario generation into a
high-level traffic scenario generation and a goal-conditioned
trajectory infilling. By jointly modeling the initial and goal
states, our approach captures reachable initial and goal states,
as well as social interactions, from a real-world driving
dataset. This hierarchical structure provides enhanced inter-
pretability from high-level traffic scenarios and simplifies the
trajectory generation task into a goal-conditioned prediction
problem. Our framework not only optimizes the generative
process but also maintains modular compatibility with exist-
ing models in the trajectory generation domain.
Limitations and Future Work. Despite these contributions,
our approach has certain limitations. In the proposed frame-
work, stochasticity is confined to the high-level scenario
generation, while the trajectory generation is formulated as
a deterministic, goal-conditioned infilling task rather than
a probabilistic process. While this accelerates inference, it
limits the diversity of trajectories for a given high-level sce-
nario. To address this, we plan to integrate generative models
into trajectory infilling to better capture the multimodality of
agent behavior and extend it to conditional generation based
on partially observed agent trajectories.
Conclusion. TrafficDiffuser demonstrates that modeling traf-
fic scene initialization with agents’ intent enhances the
interpretability of synthesized traffic scenarios. By factor-
izing traffic scenario generation into high-level scenario


(a) Generated high level traffic scenario
(b) Ours (HC on init and final states)
(c) PD-Traj (HC on init)
Map C
Map D
Fig. 7.
Visualization of End-to-end Traffic Scenario Generation. Each row has an identical map structure to demonstrate trajectory generation given
a high-level scenario. (a) visualizes the sampled high-level traffic scenarios containing the initial and goal states, and (b) illustrates the infilled trajectory
between them with hard constraints (HC). (c) demonstrates the compatibility of the framework with the PD-Traj model to generate trajectories conditioned
on the given initial states.
generation and goal-conditioned trajectory infilling problems,
we provide a modular and efficient pipeline for synthesiz-
ing complex multi-agent traffic scenarios. Ultimately, this
framework provides an efficient, interpretable foundation for
developing and validating autonomous systems in realistic
traffic scenarios.
REFERENCES
[1] B. Wilson, W. Qi, T. Agarwal, J. Lambert, J. Singh, S. Khandelwal,
B. Pan, R. Kumar, A. Hartnett, J. K. Pontes, D. Ramanan, P. Carr,
and J. Hays, “Argoverse 2: Next generation datasets for self-driving
perception and forecasting,” in NeurIPS Datasets and Benchmarks
Track, 2021.
[2] C. M. Jiang, Y. Bai, A. Cornman, C. Davis, X. Huang, H. Jeon,
S. Kulshrestha, J. W. Lambert, S. Li, X. Zhou, C. Fuertes, C. Yuan,
M. Tan, Y. Zhou, and D. Anguelov, “Scenediffuser: Efficient and
controllable driving simulation initialization and rollout,” in NeurIPS,
2024.
[3] L. Rowe, R. Girgis, A. Gosselin, L. Paull, C. Pal, and F. Heide,
“Scenario dreamer: Vectorized latent diffusion for generating driving
simulation environments,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2025.
[4] J. Lu, K. Wong, C. Zhang, S. Suo, and R. Urtasun, “Scenecontrol:
Diffusion for controllable traffic scene generation,” in ICRA, 2024,
pp. 16 908–16 914.
[5] S. Tan, K. Wong, S. Wang, S. Manivasagam, M. Ren, and R. Urtasun,
“Scenegen: Learning to generate realistic traffic scenes,” in Proceed-
ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), June 2021, pp. 892–901.
[6] L. Rowe, R. Girgis, A. Gosselin, B. Carrez, F. Golemo, F. Heide,
L. Paull, and C. Pal, “Ctrl-sim: Reactive and controllable driving
agents with offline reinforcement learning,” 2024.
[7] D. Grimm, A. Abouelazm, and J. M. Z¨ollner, “Goal-based trajectory
prediction for improved cross-dataset generalization,” in 2025 IEEE
28th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems
(ITSC), 2025, pp. 3007–3013.
[8] H. Zhao, J. Gao, T. Lan, C. Sun, B. Sapp, B. Varadarajan, Y. Shen,
Y. Shen, Y. Chai, C. Schmid, C. Li, and D. Anguelov, “Tnt: Target-
driven trajectory prediction,” 2020.
[9] K. Chitta, D. Dauner, and A. Geiger, “Sledge: Synthesizing driving
environments with generative models and rule-based traffic,” in ECCV,
2024.
[10] S. Sun, Z. Gu, T. Sun, J. Sun, C. Yuan, Y. Han, D. Li, and M. H. Ang,
“Drivescenegen: Generating diverse and realistic driving scenarios
from scratch,” IEEE RA-L, 2024.
[11] M. Liang, B. Yang, R. Hu, Y. Chen, R. Liao, S. Feng, and R. Urtasun,
“Learning lane graph representations for motion forecasting,” 2020.
[12] J. Gao, C. Sun, H. Zhao, Y. Shen, D. Anguelov, C. Li, and C. Schmid,
“Vectornet: Encoding hd maps and agent dynamics from vectorized
representation,” 2020.
[13] P. Dhariwal and A. Q. Nichol, “Diffusion models beat GANs on image
synthesis,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. W. Vaughan, Eds., 2021.
[14] E. Vinitsky, N. Lichtl´e, X. Yang, B. Amos, and J. Foerster, “Nocturne:
a scalable driving benchmark for bringing multi-agent learning one
step closer to the real world,” 2023.
[15] J. Philion, X. B. Peng, and S. Fidler, “Trajeglish: Traffic modeling as
next-token prediction,” in ICLR, 2024.
[16] D. S. Lee, A. Karthikeyan, Y. V. Pant, and S. Fischmeister, “Path
diffuser: Diffusion model for data-driven traffic simulator,” in 2025
IEEE 28th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation
Systems (ITSC), 2025, pp. 569–576.
[17] T. Ye, L. Dong, Y. Xia, Y. Sun, Y. Zhu, G. Huang, and F. Wei,
“Differential transformer,” in ICLR, 2025.
[18] T. Salimans and J. Ho, “Progressive distillation for fast sampling of
diffusion models,” 2022.
[19] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic mod-
els,” in NeurIPS, H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. Balcan,
and H. Lin, Eds., 2020.
[20] Y. Wang, C. Tang, L. Sun, S. Rossi, Y. Xie, C. Peng, T. Hannagan,
S. Sabatini, N. Poerio, M. Tomizuka et al., “Optimizing diffusion
models for joint trajectory prediction and controllable generation,” in
ECCV, 2025, pp. 324–341.
[21] C. M. Jiang, A. Cornman, C. Park, B. Sapp, Y. Zhou, and D. Anguelov,
“Motiondiffuser: Controllable multi-agent motion prediction using
diffusion,” in CVPR, 2023, pp. 9644–9653.
[22] Z. Zhou, J. Wang, Y.-H. Li, and Y.-K. Huang, “Query-centric trajectory
prediction,” in CVPR, 2023.
[23] L. Rowe, R. Girgis, A. Gosselin, L. Paull, C. Pal, and F. Heide,
“Scenario dreamer: Vectorized latent diffusion for generating driving
simulation environments,” in Proceedings of the Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition Conference, 2025, pp. 17 207–17 218.
